---
layout: post
title: "Artifacting"
date: 2003-03-23
comments: true
tags: process
---

Software development is a discipline of artifacts; for a bunch of
folks who like to _do_ things, we seem surprisingly wedded to nouns,
not verbs. Just look at the vocabulary of methodologies: requirements,
designs, quality, communication, tests, deliverables—all good solid
things. And yet increasingly I’m realizing that these things, these
nouns, are not really all that useful. Let’s look at just two of them
(for now), _requirements_ and _quality_.


The value of spending three months doing a requirements analysis is
not the 150 page document that is produced. It certainly doesn’t
capture the full nuance of the system, and it’s just about certain
that it will gradually become outdated as the project butts up against
reality and the implementation adapts accordingly. No, the value of
requirements is not the deliverable document, the artifact. Instead
the value is the process that everyone goes through in order to
produce the document: the understanding gained, the relationships
forged, the negotiations, the compromises, and all the other little
interactions which share information.


Quality is another terribly important word. We plan it, measure it,
hire folks to manage it, and put big posters about it on our
walls. But again, quality should not be a noun: you can’t measure it,
or draw it, or describe it. Quality is a part of the process; it’s in
the doing. Quality isn’t a set of rules, or a set of metrics. Quality
is in the spirit of the smallest of our daily activities.


Once I started thinking about this as a pattern, it started to change
the way I look at many of the other artifacts we produce (including
the delivered programs themselves). Often the true value of
a _thing_ isn’t the thing itself, but instead is the activity that
created it.


So, a challenge. Think of some of the common nouns we deal with on a
daily basis (_test_, _UML diagram_, and _architecture_ might be
interesting starting places). Then try to recast them (somehow) as
verbs. Where do you find the value? Should we be emphasising the doing
of things more, and the artifacts less? How?

