---
layout: post
title: "Debating with Knives"
date: 2003-06-17
comments: true
tags: []
---

A couple of years ago at OOPSLA I saw a wonderful panel format. On
stage there was a table, short side facing the audience. People
sitting on one side of the table had to support the motion, those on
the other had to oppose it. At any time, anyone could stand up, walk
to the other side of the table, and tap someone on the shoulder. Those
two people then swapped places: the one arguing _for_ then had to
argue _against_. After a while, they let members of the audience come
up and tap on shoulders too.


At last night’s Pragmatic Practitioner dinner here in Dallas we tried
the same thing. After the meal was cleared away, we used our left-over
knives to indicate the position we were taking: a knife lying in the
customary end-on position meant you were supporting the statement
“statically typed languages are better than dynamically types ones.” A
knife lying crossways meant you were opposing the motion. We started
with knives alternating around the table, and tried to maintain a kind
of parity: you could only swap your knife’s position if someone else
did. Every now and then we had a group swap, where every knife
switched.


The result was a fun and not too serious debate. It was good to be
able to argue both sides of a position; very few things are black and
white, and it’s nice to be able to acknowledge opposing points of
view.


Now I’m wondering if the same technique could work in a business
setting. Could it take the heat out of the discussions we have about
architectures, design, timescales, and so on?

