---
layout: post
title: "Bill Venners' Interview"
date: 2003-03-02
comments: true
tags: []
---

Andy and I were in Seattle in January for Scott Meyer’s Code Quality
get together. Bill Venners took the opportunity to interview the two
of us for his online magazine. The first of eight installments(!), a
discussion of broken windows, is at <a
href="http://www.artima.com/intv/fixit.html"><a
href="http://www.artima.com/intv/fixit.html">www.artima.com/intv/fixit.html</a></a>.


The third installment of Bill Venners interview with Andy and me is
now <a
href="http://www.artima.com/intv/goodenough.html">online</a>. My
favorite line is Andy’s: _"Having a quality officer is kind of like
having a breathing officer."_ Bill really does a remarkable job of
taking our ramblings and rendering them down into something that might
almost be considered coherent. He’s a nice guy too: have a look at the
stuff on his site, <a href="http://www.artima.com/"><a
href="http://www.artima.com">www.artima.com</a></a>.


Bill Venners has posted the fourth <a
href="http://www.artima.com/intv/metadata.html">article</a> extracted
from an interview he did with Andy and me in Portland. This one’s
about our assertions that you should “Put abstractions in code,
details in metadata.” Reading the transcript, we come off dissing XP a
fair amount; YAGNI comes in for some criticism. We claim that it’s OK
to use experience to predict which parts of a system will be volatile,
and it’s OK to build in support to handle that volatility
(particularly by using metadata to describe the details of the
application). I’m expecting a lot of e-mail on this one… :)


The fifth installment of Bill Venners’ <a
href="http://www.artima.com/intv/adapt.html">interview</a> with Andy
and me is all about building adaptable systems. The previous article
generated an enormous thread (still running) of negative comment in
the Extreme Programming mailing list. This one will probably generate
death threats…


In the seventh <a
href="http://www.artima.com/intv/garden.html">part</a> of Bill
Venner’s discussion with Andy and me, we’re talking about gardening as
a metaphor for software development.


Thinking in terms of analogies is a useful way of extracting hidden
meaning. Brian Marick and Ken Schwaber are co-hosting an
interesting <a
href="http://www.visibleworkings.com/analogyfest/">workshop</a> at
Alistair Cockburn’s Salt Lake Agile Development<a
href="http://agiledevelopmentconference.com/">Conference</a>. I
particular like the first phrase in the description: _The Analogy Fest
is an attempt to manufacture serendipity _.


The eighth installment of Bill Venners’ interview of Andy and me is
now <a href="http://www.artima.com/intv/tracer.html">online</a>. We’re
talking about tracer bullets, prototypes, and iterations. The key to
tracer bullets is the feedback they give: they let you know how well
you’re aiming in a real-world environment. Short iterations and lots
of feedback are the software development equivalent.









