---
layout: post
title: "Every day in every way…"
date: 2003-02-08
comments: true
tags: ["recruiting"]
---

Imagine a simple (and somewhat boring) card game. In each round, all
players are dealt one card each. Each player may hold at most three
cards (so after the third round they must start discarding). After an
arbitrary number of rounds, the player with the highest card total
wins.


The strategy is pretty simple: when forced to discard, always discard
your lowest card. No rocket science here: when you can’t control the
cards you’re dealt, you win by eliminating the weakest of your
holdings.


This seems to be a reasonable strategy in any situation where you need
to optimize some collection of “things,” but where the resources you
receive have unknown characteristics.


Our industry is suffering from an embarrassment of bad
programmers. Much of the blame can be leveled at the hiring frenzy
that occurred during the dot com boom, where anyone who could play
Quake (or who had once watched someone play Quake) could get a job
coding (and playing foosball at work). Many of these people are still
in the industry.


So now we have a problem. Interviewing and recruiting good people is
very difficult; For most organizations we’ve seen it’s a hit or miss
affair. This means that the bad get let in along with the good (just
like being dealt random cards). However, once the bad folks have been
hired, it turns out to be hard to fire them. Unlike the card game,
they stay in your hand, dragging down your overall score.


There are three things to be done here. First, companies could get
better at recruiting. Unfortunately, one of the best indicators
available to recruitors, past performance, is hard to come by. In the
US at least, employers now tend to give anodyne references to
ex-employees rather than tell the truth and risk being sued.


Second, we could find a way to fire the ineffective developers. If
that happened enough times to an individual, they might get the hint
and leave the industry (which would be good for all of
us). Unfortunately, that’s also unlikely to happen. Even though most
developers in the US are employees at-will (meaning they are in theory
employed at the whim of their employer), in reality the various
anti-discrimination laws make firing a risky business for most
companies.


Our third strategy isn’t available to the card players: we can improve
the individual cards in our hand. This means working hard to train and
retrain folks, not just in the specifics of technologies and
languages, but also in the soft disciplines: communications, business
practices, and so on. Some developers aren’t trainable, but I’m
thinking that the vast majority will benefit.


Interestingly, there are companies who recognize the value of
attrition. GE, for example, has every level of manager rank their
employees. After justifying these ranks to the manager’s manager, the
company then puts in place an action plan for the bottom 10% (a plan
which can include termination, a performance improvement plan with a
time limit, or a move to a more suitable position). I don’t think I
like the rigidity of GEs policy (at least as externally stated), but I
think the intention is good.


Over the next few years, we all have to do something to improve the
quality of the work delivered by our industry. If _we_ don’t, we’ll
find legislators doing it for us (possibly with professional licensing
schemes and attempts to hold developers liable for faults in
software). And improving the quality of work means improving the
quality of the development community. Maybe it would be in our
long-term interests to find ways to make recruiting more reliable
(perhaps by setting up a way for employers to comment truthfully on a
developer’s past performance). We need to make it easier to fire the
truly bad developers (contract to hire and probationary periods are a
good interim measure). And we need to find ways to promote on-going
professional training. If we don’t help ourselves, someone in
government will do it to us.

