---
layout: post
title: "The Pragmatic Studio"
date: 2005-03-24
comments: true
tags: ["training"]
---

For a while now, Andy and I have been giving our <a
href="http://pragmaticprogrammer.com/courses/pp3.html">Pragmatic
Workshop</a> to companies around the world.<a
href="http://pragmaticautomation.com/">Mike Clark</a>, who wrote
our <a href="http://pragmaticprogrammer.com/sk/auto">Automation
Book</a> has been doing the same, running workshops on testing and
automation.


So when three of us got talking, it seemed natural to see if we could
bring the threads together and produce a combined workshop covering
the <a href="http://pragmaticprogrammer.com/sk">Starter
Kit</a> essentials. The more we talked, the more fun it sounded—we
wanted to put together something a bit more lively and interactive
that the typical “sit and listen to someone talk” session. And we
wanted to make it stick—these practices are vital to project success,
and the more we could help teams come away with the will and knowledge
to use them, the better.


Mike did all the work, and he’s done an incredible job. The result is
the <a href="http://studio.pragprog.com/">Pragmatic Studio</a>, a
series of two-day events held in cities around the country. The first
is in Denver on June 20th and 21st, followed by dates in Seattle and
Reston. This is just the start—if you want us to come to your town,
drop Mike <a href="mailto:info@studio.pragprog.com">a note</a> and let
us know.


I’m excited about this. In the past, we needed to find companies who’d
pay the full cost for us to come in and work with their teams. Now
Mike’s put together events where companies can share the costs,
sending as many team members as they want.


Maybe we’ll see you there…

