---
layout: post
title: "Agile Retail"
date: 2007-02-15
comments: true
tags: []
---

I’m wondering: could the same organizing principles that work for
community web sites work for retail stores?

{%img1 right /img/flyingbooks.jpg%}

If you go into a bookstore, you’ll notice that not all books are
displayed the same. Some are displayed on tables at the store
entrance, or at the entrance to particular sections. Some are
displayed on endcaps—that narrow space at the end of a shelf. And some
are displayed on shelves with their covers facing the public. And then
there’s the vast majority of books, coyly showing you just their
spines.

And then there’s the shelving itself. Some books have clear homes: a
book on the Java libraries likely belongs under Java programming. But
where does a book on Ruby belong? Programming languages? Web
development? Next to Perl and Python? The jewelry section?

Ever wonder what determines where a book goes and how it is displayed.

The basic answer is that most large bookstores ignore the publishers
shelving suggestions and decide at head office where each book goes,
often based on title alone. This is why you sometimes find a book a
long way from where you’d logically expect it to be.

And when it comes to displaying a book more prominently than the
standard shelving, there’s another simple answer. Publishers pay for
promotions, and stores display the books appropriately.

Are either of these practices in the interest of the customer? Perhaps
indirectly—bookstores make a lot of money from the fees they charge
for promoting books, and it could be argued that those fees keep the
stores in business. But in terms of serving their primary purpose,
which I’d define as making it easy for customers to find and buy
interesting books, I’d say that both practices are suboptimal.

Having a central department decide shelving relies on one person being
able to decide the likely audience for each book under their care, and
then to decide where the average reader would expect to find that
book. Both can at best cater to the typical case, and are bound to
lead to frustration.

The reader is also poorly served when it comes to promotional
placement. Sometimes it’s useful: having a table by the front door
piled with the latest Harry Potter is helpful, given that you know
that a large number of people will flock in to pick one up. But for
the less popular books the practice again moves decisions from the
consumer to some central marketing department. Publisher Xyz may want
the world to know about a new book, but the world might not be
interested.

Online we address these kinds of problems using various
self-organizing folksonomy systems: tagging, search, top-ten lists,
“readers who bought X also bought Y” and so on.

So could we do the same in the retail world? I think it might be
possible.

Say you had a store where you encouraged people to reshelve
things. You’d have broad sections (Computers, Photography, and so
one), and some cardboard labels you could put on the shelves
themselves. People could write their own labels, create their own
sections, and move books as they saw fit. If someone really likes a
book, they could turn it face out to show others they approve. They
could even move the books onto display tables. Not sure if a Photoshop
title belongs in Photography or Computers? Put a copy in both
sections.

Would such a store work, or would it just be chaos? I frankly don’t
know. But I suspect that people felt that user-organized sites such as
wikis wouldn’t work, and Wikipedia and friends have proven that
wrong. Flickr and del.icio.us have shown that tagging is a great tool
for organizing content. And all these sites have an additional,
emergent, property that would be wonderful to see in a bricks and
mortar store—they allow serendipitous discoveries. You come across
things that delight you that you wouldn’t have thought to look for.

Wouldn’t that make it worth going to a real store again?

