---
layout: post
title: "Shoulda used this earlier"
date: 2008-04-27
comments: true
tags: [ "ruby" ]
---

In many ways, testing software is like going out and getting
exercise. You know you should do it, and you know it does you good,
but it’s also pretty easy to find an excuse to skip it (I’ll make it
up tomorrow).

So anything that makes testing easier is good, because it cuts down on
the excuses not to do it.

One thing I’ve never really liked about the conventional xUnit-style
testing frameworks was the setup and teardown structure. In these
frameworks, a test case is a class, and setup and teardown are
implemented by methods in that class. Each test is also a method, so
the basic flow is

``` 
for each test method in the class
  run setup
  run the test method
  run teardown
end
```

Nice and simple. Each test method got the benefit of a standard
environment created by the setup method, and the teardown method got
the job of tidying up after.

Except… when I’m writing tests, I typically want to set up lots of
different scenarios. I’ll want A and B and C, then A and B but not C,
then A and not B, then A and D, and so on. I had two choices—write
lots of test case classes, using subclassing to inherit common setup
behavior, or write per-test method setup code (often factored out into
helpers). In the end, I almost always did the latter, And that was
tedious, and it made it harder to see the tests for the setup code.

I flirted with RSpec. Its spec framework seemed to have what I
wanted. But I just couldn’t get myself to enjoy using it. (I think
it’s a cat people/dog people kind of thing)

### Enter shoulda

Then, a couple of weeks back, Mike Clark and Chad Fowler introduced me
to <a
href="http://www.thoughtbot.com/projects/shoulda">shoulda</a>. Shoulda
isn’t a testing framework. Instead, it extends Ruby’s existing
Test::Unit framework with the idea of test_contexts_. A context is a
section of your test case where all the test methods have something in
common. At it simplest, a context could be simply used as an
annotation device (and, yes, this is a silly example):


``` ruby
context "My factorial method" do
  should "return 1 when passed 0" do
    assert_equal 1, fact(0)
  end
  should "return 1 when passed 1" do
    assert_equal 1, fact(1)
  end
  should "return 6 when passed 3" do
    assert_equal 6, fact(3)
  end
end

```

The stuff in a context can share common setup code—just write
a `setup` block.

``` ruby
class CartTest < Test::Unit::TestCase

  context "An empty cart" do
    setup do
      @cart = orders(:wilmas_empty_cart)
    end

    should "have no line items" do
      assert_equal 0, @cart.line_items.size
    end

    should "have a zero price" do
      assert_equal 0, @cart.price
    end
  end

  context "Some other context..."
    ...
  end
end
```

So now, within a single test case I can set up multiple contexts, and
each context can have its own environment.

But, take it back to my original problem. I often want to set up
hierarchies of related environments for my tests. The shaoulda code
handles this wonderfully, because it lets me nest contexts. For
example, I’m adding a feature to our store that gives customers some
additional information if, during checkout, their credit card
transaction was initially rejected because the address was wrong, and
was then accepted when they fixed the address. I wanted two tests, one
without the prior address error, and one with.


To set up this environment, I needed to set up a shopping cart, create
a dummy response from our payment gateway, and post that response to
the application. In the case of the prior address error, I also wanted
to inject an entry containing that error into the transactions
associated with the order prior to generating the response.


With shoulda, I simply created some nested contexts. The top level
context did the shared setup, and the inner contexts then set up
appropriate environments for their tests. It looked like this:

``` ruby
context "Checking out"  do
  setup do
    @cart = cart_named(:freds_full_cart)
    @cart.prepare_for_store_authorize!
    @params = approved_authnet_response(@cart)
  end                  

  context "with no AVS errors in CC transaction history" do
    setup do
      post :post_from_authnet_authorize, @params
    end

    should_redirect_to "{:action => :receipt}"
  end 

  context "with AVS errors in CC transaction history" do
    setup do
      avs_error = CcTransaction.new(:response_code => 2, :response_reason_code => 27)
      @cart.cc_transactions << avs_error
      post :post_from_authnet_authorize, @params
    end

    should_redirect_to "{:action => :explain_avs_mismatch}"
  end
end 

```

The outer setup gets run before the execution of each of the inner
contexts. And the setup in the inner contexts gets run when running
that context. And shoulda keeps track of it all, so I get very natural
error messages if an assertion fails. For example, if the test in the
second context above fails, I’d get

```
Checking out with AVS errors in CC transaction history should 
redirect to "{:action => :explain_avs_mixsmatch}". 

```

So, now, I can finally set up my hierarchies of test environments in a
natural way. It isn’t revolutionary. It’s just one less excuse for not
testing…

