---
layout: post
title: "Followup to my EMail experiment"
date: 2011-11-12
comments: true
---

So the Hacker News folks are having a 
[discussion](http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=3230233)
about my
[email experiment](/blog/2011/04/14/so-im-trying-an-email-experiment/)
last April. Many interesting points were raised. One
fair question is “how did the experiment work out?”

In short, it worked incredibly well.

I was mostly worried about annoying the folks sending me email. But
the only feedback I got was positive.

I was also a little worried about folks abusing the [urgent] flag. But
that didn’t happen, either. I had perhaps 5 or 6 urgent emails, and
they were indeed things I needed to handle when I got back. Maybe I’m
just lucky when it comes to the people who correspond with me.

The experiment had two positive effects on my life. First, the
vacation was genuinely a lot nicer not having to worry about the sacks
full of mail piling up for me when I got back. Was that selfish of me?
Perhaps a little.

I wasn’t expecting the other side effect. Since I returned from
vacation, the quality of email I receive has improved, and the
quantity I receive has dropped. I still enjoy interacting with all the
people I need to interact with, and I still get to answer all the
questions that need answering. It just seems that my inbox is somehow
more focussed.

I have a theory. I think that, during the course of the preceding few
years, I’d become something of a slave to my email. I’d answer stuff
as it arrived. And those rapid responses would in turn trigger another
round of email, and another. There was almost an adreneline rush to
it.

So my vacation broke that cycle. And now things are sane (or at least
closer to sane).

