---
layout: post
title: Reactive systems have no top
date: 2014-01-04
comments: true
tags: [design, javascript]
---

Back when I used to consult into projects in trouble, there was a
trick that always worked, Look for classes or modules
named `XxxManager`. These puppies would always be at the epicenter of
the structural spaghetti. Invariably they’d be doing too much, with
lots of conditional code and a fair amount of poking into the business
of the things they were supposed to be managing.

So we’d pick them apart, split out functionality, and see if there was
a way to either eliminate them, or turn them into something less
coupled (my favorite approach when appropriate would be to turn each
into a state machine).

But, as they say, the cobbler’s children have no shoes. I fell into
the trap myself this week.

Over the Christmas break, I’ve been amusing myself by writing a
terminal emulator in Coffeescript. Part of the intent is to allow me
to record and then play back interactive sessions. The playback will
have a bunch of bells and whistles (including fast forward, rewind,
step-by-step and so on).

{% img reactive.png %}

To manage all this (yes, there’s that word) I wrote a class
called `Driver.`

Perhaps it was the eggnog, but the usual alarm bells were muted. I
happily coded away for half a day, hacking more and more stuff into
the driver. We had events, callbacks, a little RxJS, and lots of
asking other objects for status.

And it bogged down. Every change got more difficult. Every test harder
to write. And it wasn’t fun.

So I took the dog for a walk, and the dog told me I was being
stupid. I’d written a manager class. It wasn’t
called `PlaybackManager`—that would have been a giveaway. I’d called
it `Driver`. That kind of pathetically meaningless name should also
have been a giveaway, but until the dog pointed it out, I’d kinda
spaced it out.

I got back, gave the dog a treat, rolled back the code to the start of
day, and looked for a good name for a class that would drive the
playback. I ended up with `VcrControls`. What did it control? A class
called `Player`. The `Player` class had methods such
as `play()`, `rewind()`, and `step()`. The `VcrControls` object sat
between the UI and the player. And the code just fell into place.

In a way, this is a variant of the “tell, don’t ask” rule. 

Reactive systems have no top—they are lots of components that
transform data and events. There’s no place for anything called a
manager in such a system. And careful naming (cf `Driver`…) is a quick
way of working out when you break the rule.

