---
layout: post
title: "Not Voting is Participation"
date: 2016-10-29
comments: true
tags:
---

I became a US citizen two years ago. This is my first US General
Election, so I've been thinking a lot about what it means for me to
vote. I've decided that my vote serves two purposes.

The first is the obvious one: you put a check mark next to a
candidate's name, and the one with the most checkmarks wins (modulo
the antiquated process of the electoral college).

But the second reason for voting is the one I've been thinking about most.
When I vote, what I'm doing is saying "I want this person to represent
my views." I am giving that person my tiny portion of the power
represented by the will of the people. And all these tiny portions add
up, and eventually are used by the winner as the basis of _their_
power. They call it their mandate, and the mandate gives the president
legitimacy.

And this is where the second reason for voting differs from the first.
In terms of winning, the first is a single decision, based on counting
(and recounting, and the supreme court, and...). But the second is
not. The mandate of a presidency depends in large part on the
perception of support they have. If you just squeak out a vicory,
you'll be perceived to be weaker than someone who knocked it out of
the park.

When I studied for the citizenship test, I learned that one of
the responsibilities I would adopt was to "participate in the
democratic process." And indeed, this is a lesson that is drilled into
all of us at this point in the election cycle. We're told "get out and
vote" and "it's your duty to vote."

But what if neither candidate represents your values in any way?

The popular answer today seems to be "vote for the one you dislike the
least."

I think that is morally corrupt.

Voting for someone is a transfer of power from you to them. Voting for
someone on the basis that their values are bad, but not as bad as the
other person's, is adding to their mandate and their legitimacy. In
the end, the more votes cast, the more they can claim a mandate, and
the more damage they can do. Your protest vote is strengthening a
position you abhor. You have sold your principles to the least
negative bidder.

So that's why, when I vote, I will vote for candidates whose values
I generally support, and I will not vote for a particular position
when no candidates represent my views.

I believe that withholding your vote is a perfectly valid and
honorable way of making your feelings known, and I feel that doing so
is actively (and morally) participating in the democratic process.

Update 10/31: Just to be clear—I will be voting. There are plenty of
races where there's a candidate I can back. But I will not be making a
selection in those races (such as the presidential one) where none of
the candidates has values I can share. I wish it were otherwise—this
would have been the perfect election for an independant candidate to
make a difference.
